---
title: "X.509 Certificate Extended Key Usage (EKU) for Attestation Keys"
abbrev: "EKU for Attestation Keys"
docname: draft-jpfiset-lamps-attestationkey-eku-latest

category: std
consensus: true
submissiontype: IETF

ipr: trust200902
keyword: Internet-Draft
coding: utf-8

author:
  - name: Jean-Pierre Fiset
    org: Crypto4A Inc.
    abbrev: Crypto4A
    street: 1550A Laperriere Ave
    city: Ottawa, Ontario
    country: Canada
    code: K1Z 7T2
    email: jp@crypto4a.com

  - name: Mike Ounsworth
    org: Cryptic Forest Software
    abbrev: Cryptic Forest
    city: Sioux Lookout
    country: Canada
    email: mike@ounsworth.ca

  - name: Hannes Tschofenig
    organization: University of Applied Sciences Bonn-Rhein-Sieg
    abbrev: H-BRS
    country: Germany
    email: Hannes.Tschofenig@gmx.net

  - name: Monty Wiseman
    org:
    country: USA
    email: montywiseman32@gmail.com

normative:

informative:


--- abstract

X.509 certificates ({{!RFC5280}}) defines the Extended Key Usage (EKU) extension and specifies several key purpose
identifiers (KeyPurposeIds) for use with that extension.
This document defines a KeyPurposeId for the purpose of signing Evidence to provide remote attestation functions
as defined in the RATS Architecture ({{!RFC9334}}).



--- middle

# Introduction

Key purpose identifiers (KeyPurposeId) are added to the Extended Key Usage (EKU) extension of X.509 certificates to express
the intent of the certified key. It is used to further define the basic purpose indicated in the key usage (KU) extension.

This specification introduces the KeyPurposeId `id-kp-attestationKey` for X.509 certificates that endorse Attestation Keys
for the purpose of validating Evidence.

Attesters, as defined in RATS {{!RFC9334}}, can use cryptographic private keys to identify
the origin of generated Evidence and to protect its integrity. Those private keys are referred to as
Attestation Keys.

Attestation Keys can be endorsed by a Certification Authority (CA) by issuing X.509 certificates (see {{!RFC5280}}). Those
certificates SHOULD include an extended key usage to indicate that the certified key is dedicated to the purpose of signing
Evidence.

Verifiers responsible of validating Evidence generated by an Attester use the CA's endorsement (X.509 certificate) to support
the appraisal process.

The KeyPurposeId `id-kp-attestationKey` allows the Verifier to trust that the associated key is controlled according to the
guidance proposed in this specification.

## Example

A Hardware Security Module (HSM) is designed to generate Evidence about itself and cryptographic keys that it hosts. For the purpose
of generating Evidence, an Attestation Key is dedicated for this purpose and endorsed by the manufacturing CA.

The Attestation Key is not the only key endorsed by the manufacturing CA as many cryptographic signing keys are necessary to manage
a HSM. As a result, there are many X.509 certificates issued to the HSM by the manufacturing CA.

A Verifier responsible of appraising Evidence generated by the HSM must ensure that the Attestation Key was used. Evidence signed
by a different key, even if endorsed by the same manufacturing CA, can not be trusted. The key purpose introduced in this
specification allows Verifiers to determine during validation if a cryptographic key was intended to be used for signing
Evidence.

# Terminology

{::boilerplate bcp14-tagged}

Much of the terms used in this specification are borrowed from RATS ({{!RFC9334}}).
Readers of this specification should review the RATS Architecture and its terminology
to put in context the text presented in this specification.

Attestation Key:
: A key under the control of the Attester and reserved for the purpose of signing Evidence.

Attester:
: Role defined in {{!RFC9334}} and assigned to entities responsible of generating Evidence.

Evidence:
: The term Evidence respects the definition offered in {{!RFC9334}}. Evidence is composed of
claims and may include information such as configuration data, measurements and telemetry.

RATS:
: Remote ATtestation procedureS. Refers to a working group within IETF and all the documents developed
under this umbrella of effort. This specification is developed to support concepts developed in RATS but more
particularly refers to the RATS Architecture as introduced in {{!RFC9334}}.

Verifier:
: Role defined in {{!RFC9334}} and assigned to entities responsible of appraising the Evidence
generated by an Attester.

# Extended Key Usage for Attestation Keys

This specification defines the KeyPurposeId `id-kp-attestationKey`. This KeyPurposeId
is reserved for endorsement of Attestation Keys. In other words, the intent of the certified key is
to be dedicated to the signing of Evidence.

As described in [RFC5280], the EKU extension "MAY, at the option of the certificate issuer, be either
critical or non-critical". Selecting to identify the EKU extension as critical might have significant
impacts on the overall system performance and this decision is left to the issuing authority.

Also specified in [RFC5280], "[i]f multiple purposes are indicated the application need not recognize
all purposes indicated, as long as the intended purpose is present". Since Attestation Keys should be
dedicated to the purpose of signing Evidence, this specification RECOMMENDS that EKUs with the
KeyPurposeId `id-kp-attestationKey` not include any other key purpose.

This specification RECOMMENDS that the extension Key Usage (KU) be included for the endorsement of Attestation
Keys. Furthermore, if the KU extension is included, it SHOULD be set to "digital signature".

## Implication for a Certificate Authority

When a Certificate Authority issues a X.509 certificate that includes the extended key
usage defined in this specification, certain additional considerations MUST be taken to ensure
that the constraints defined in this document are respected.

Issuing a X.509 certificate with the extended key usage id-kp-attestationKey
equates to providing an endorsement of the identified Attester as defined in the RATS Architecture.
Therefore, the procedures and practices employed by a Certificate Authority MUST take into account
the security considerations relating to the Attestation Key as outlined in the RATS architecture.

In particular, it is not sufficient for a CA to verify that the subject of the certificate,
the Attester, has possession of the subject key. It MUST also ensure that the Attester is the only
entity that controls the key. This can be accomplished (but not restricted to) by using
a key confined to specialized hardware under the control of the Attester.

## Implication for the RATS Verifier

In {{!RFC9334}}, the Verifier is the role that appraises the Evidence produced by an
Attester. As part of the verification process, the Verifier assesses endorsements. A X.509
certificate containing the EKU `id-kp-attestationKey` is an endorsement of the Attester by the issuing authority.

A Verifier MAY reject Evidence if the X.509 certificate issued to the signing key does not contain an EKU
extension specifying the key purpose `id-kp-attestationKey`.

A Verifier MAY reject Evidence if the X.509 certificate issued to the signing key contains an EKU extension with
a key purpose other than `id-kp-attestationKey`.

A Verifier SHOULD reject Evidence if the X.509 certificate issued to the signing key contains a KU extension
with a basic purpose other than "digital signature".

## Implication for Attesters

An Attestation Key SHOULD be used by an Attester only to digitally sign evidence that
the Attester can observe in the target environment. The Attester SHOULD NOT use the
Attestation Key for any other purpose (dedication).

An Attestation Key SHOULD be under the sole control of the Attester identified in the X.509 certificate.
This constraint is to ensure that another entity can not impersonate the Attester (non-repudiation).

## Implication for Cryptographic Modules

Attestation Keys are instantiated and operated on by cryptographic modules. These modules
MUST provide the services required to accomplish the recommendations proposed in this specification.

The mechanisms used to perform those restrictions are out of scope for this specification.


# Security Considerations

{{!RFC5280}} introduces security considerations that are applicable to this specification.
The EKU purpose `id-kp-attestationKey` does not introduce additional security risks.
On the other hand, the adoption of this extended key purpose mitigates specific cross-protocol attacks in
relation to use of Attestation Keys.

The RATS Architecture ({{!RFC9334}}) offers many security considerations that should be reviewed
by implementers of this specification.


# IANA Considerations

For the ASN.1 module found in Appendix A, IANA is requested to assign
an object identifier for the module identifier (TBD0) with a
description of "id-mod-attestation-eku-2025". This should be allocated in the
"SMI Security for PKIX Module Identifier" registry (1.3.6.1.5.5.7.0).

For the ASN.1 module found in Appendix A, IANA is requested to assign
an object identifier for the extended key usage value (XX) with a
description of "id-kp-attestationKey". This should be allocated in the
"SMI Security for PKIX Extended Key Purpose" registry (1.3.6.1.5.5.7.3).


--- back

# Appendix A. ASN.1 Module
{:numbered="false"}

The following module adheres to ASN.1 specifications [X.680] and [X.690].
It defines the OID used for Attestation Key Extended Key Usage.

~~~
  AttestationEKU-2025 { iso(1) identified-organization(3) dod(6) internet(1)
       security(5) mechanisms(5) pkix(7) id-mod(0)
       id-mod-attestation-eku-2025(TBD0) }

  DEFINITIONS EXPLICIT TAGS ::=

  BEGIN

  -- EXPORTS ALL --

  -- IMPORTS NOTHING --

  -- OID Arc --

  id-kp  OBJECT IDENTIFIER  ::= {
    iso(1) identified-organization(3) dod(6) internet(1)
    security(5) mechanisms(5) pkix(7) kp(3) }

  -- Attestation Key Extended Key Usage --

  id-kp-attestationKey OBJECT IDENTIFIER ::= { id-kp XX }

  END
~~~

# Acknowledgments
{:numbered="false"}

TODO acknowledge.
