draft-jpfiset-lamps-attestationkey-eku.md, before:

---
title: "Extended Key Usage (EKU) for X.509 Certificates associated with Attestation Keys"
abbrev: "EKU for Attestation Keys"
docname: draft-jpfiset-lamps-attestationkey-eku-latest

category: std
consensus: true
submissiontype: IETF

ipr: trust200902
keyword: Internet-Draft
coding: utf-8

author:
  - name: Jean-Pierre Fiset
    org: Crypto4A Inc.
    abbrev: Crypto4A
    street: 1550A Laperriere Ave
    city: Ottawa, Ontario
    country: Canada
    code: K1Z 7T2
    email: jp@crypto4a.com

  - name: Mike Ounsworth
    org: Entrust Limited
    abbrev: Entrust
    street: 2500 Solandt Road - Suite 100
    city: Ottawa, Ontario
    country: Canada
    code: K2K 3G5
    email: mike.ounsworth@entrust.com

  - name: Hannes Tschofenig
    organization: University of Applied Sciences Bonn-Rhein-Sieg
    abbrev: H-BRS
    country: Germany
    email: Hannes.Tschofenig@gmx.net

  - name: Monty Wiseman
    org:
    country: USA
    email: montywiseman32@gmail.com

normative:

informative:


--- abstract

As described in RFC5280, key usages are specified in X.509 certificates using the
certificate extensions "Key Usage" and "Extended Key Usage". This document defines
an Extended Key Usage (EKU) relating to keys that are dedicated to the purpose of
signing attestation evidence as introduced in RFC9334.



--- middle

# Introduction

Attesters, as defined in Remote Attestation Procedures
(RATS) in {{!RFC9334}}, can use cryptographic private keys to identify the origin of
the evidence and protect its integrity. Those private keys are referred to as
Attestation Keys.

Attestation Keys can be endorsed by a Certification Authority (CA) by issuing
X.509 certificates (see {{!RFC5280}}). Those certificates SHOULD include an extended
key usage to indicate that the associated key is dedicated to the purpose of attesting
evidence. This allows recipients of signed evidence to trust that the associated key is
controlled according to the constraints specified in this document.

# Terminology

Much of the terms used in this specification are borrowed from RATS ({{!RFC9334}}).
Readers of this specification should review the RATS architecture and its terminology
to put in context the text presented in this specification.

Attestation Key : A key under the control of the Attester and reserved for the purpose
of signing evidence.

# Extended Key Usage for Attestation Key

This specification defines the KeyPurposeId id-kp-attestationKey. This KeyPurposeId
is reserved for Attestation Keys.

The term "signing evidence" refers to performing a digital signature
using an Attestation Key over content that includes claims and measurements about the target
environment (see {{!RFC9334}}).

An Attestation Key must be associated with the "digital signing" key usage, as any
other keys used to performed digital signature. Furthermore, an Attestation Key MUST
adhere to the following constraints:

* An Attestation Key SHOULD be used by an Attester only to digitally sign evidence that
the Attester can observe in the target environment. The Attester SHOULD NOT use the
Attestation Key for any other purpose (dedication).

* An Attestation Key MUST NOT be controlled by any entity other than the associated
Attester. This constraint is to ensure that other entity can not impersonate the
Attester (non-repudiation).

## Including the EKU for Attestation Key in Certificates

When the EKU id-kp-attestationKey is included in a X.509, other considerations should
be taken:

* The X.509 extension "key usage" MUST be set to "digital signature". In other words,
the value of the associated field includes the bit "digitalSignature" set.

* The X.509 extension "extended key usage" SHOULD NOT include usage other than the
one defined in this document (id-kp-attestationKey). If other extended key usages
are provided, they MUST be compatible with constraints outlined in this specification.

## Implication for a Certificate Authority

When a Certificate Authority issues a X.509 certificate that includes the extended key
usage defined in this specification, certain additional considerations MUST be taken to ensure
that the constraints defined in this document are respected.

Issuing a X.509 certificate with the extended key usage id-kp-attestationKey
equates to providing an endorsement of the attester as defined in the RATS architecture.
Therefore, the procedures and practices employed by a Certificate Authority MUST be
augmented to take into account the security considerations relating to the Attestation
Key as outlined in the RATS architecture.

In particular, it is not sufficient for a CA to verify that the subject of the certificate,
the Attester, has possession of the subject key. It MUST also ensure that the Attester is the only
entity that controls the key. This can be accomplished (but not restricted to) by using
a key confined to specialized hardware under the control of the Attester.

## Implication for the RATS Verifier

In {{!RFC9334}}, the Verifier is the role that consumes the evidence produced by an
Attester. As part of the verification process, the Verifier assesses endorsements, among
other things. A X.509 certificate containing the EKU id-kp-attestationKey is an
endorsement of the Attester by the issuing authorities.

While assessing an endorsement provided this way, a Verifier must follow all practices
to validate the veracity of the certificate.

## Implication for Cryptographic Modules

Attestation Keys are instantiated and operated on by cryptographic modules. These modules
MUST provide the services required to restrict the use of an Attestation Key to its
associated Attester.

The mechanisms used to perform those restrictions are out of scope for this specification.


# Conventions and Definitions

{::boilerplate bcp14-tagged}


# Security Considerations

For attestation evidence to be valuable, coordination between the various roles is required:

* The cryptographic module MUST restrict the use of the Attestation Key to the associated Attester.

* The CA MUST ensure that the Attester is the only entity that controls the Attestation Key which
is subject to the issuance of a certificate.

* A Verifier must perform the assessment of the presented evidence using all the procedures
required to ascertain as to the origin and validity of the attester.

The risks associated with a failure of this coordination reduces the quality of the trustworthiness
of the evidence.

The implications are outlines in the Security Considerations section in RATS ({{!RFC9334}}).


# IANA Considerations

For the ASN.1 module found in Appendix A, IANA is requested to assign
an object identifier for the module identifier (TBD0) with a
description of "id-mod-attestation-eku-2025". This should be allocated in the
"SMI Security for PKIX Module Identifier" registry (1.3.6.1.5.5.7.0).

For the ASN.1 module found in Appendix A, IANA is requested to assign
an object identifier for the extended key usage value (XX) with a
description of "id-kp-attestationKey". This should be allocated in the
"SMI Security for PKIX Extended Key Purpose" registry (1.3.6.1.5.5.7.3).


--- back

# Appendix A. ASN.1 Module
{:numbered="false"}

The following module adheres to ASN.1 specifications [X.680] and [X.690].
It defines the OID used for Attestation Key Extended Key Usage.

~~~
  AttestationEKU-2025 { iso(1) identified-organization(3) dod(6) internet(1)
       security(5) mechanisms(5) pkix(7) id-mod(0)
       id-mod-attestation-eku-2025(TBD0) }

  DEFINITIONS EXPLICIT TAGS ::=

  BEGIN

  -- EXPORTS ALL --

  -- IMPORTS NOTHING --

  -- OID Arc --

  id-kp  OBJECT IDENTIFIER  ::= {
    iso(1) identified-organization(3) dod(6) internet(1)
    security(5) mechanisms(5) pkix(7) kp(3) }

  -- Attestation Key Extended Key Usage --

  id-kp-attestationKey OBJECT IDENTIFIER ::= { id-kp XX }

  END
~~~

# Acknowledgments
{:numbered="false"}

TODO acknowledge.

Commit message:

Address whether EKU should be critical.
Addresses #4

draft-jpfiset-lamps-attestationkey-eku.md, after:

---
title: "Extended Key Usage (EKU) for X.509 Certificates associated with Attestation Keys"
abbrev: "EKU for Attestation Keys"
docname: draft-jpfiset-lamps-attestationkey-eku-latest

category: std
consensus: true
submissiontype: IETF

ipr: trust200902
keyword: Internet-Draft
coding: utf-8

author:
  - name: Jean-Pierre Fiset
    org: Crypto4A Inc.
    abbrev: Crypto4A
    street: 1550A Laperriere Ave
    city: Ottawa, Ontario
    country: Canada
    code: K1Z 7T2
    email: jp@crypto4a.com

  - name: Mike Ounsworth
    org: Entrust Limited
    abbrev: Entrust
    street: 2500 Solandt Road - Suite 100
    city: Ottawa, Ontario
    country: Canada
    code: K2K 3G5
    email: mike.ounsworth@entrust.com

  - name: Hannes Tschofenig
    organization: University of Applied Sciences Bonn-Rhein-Sieg
    abbrev: H-BRS
    country: Germany
    email: Hannes.Tschofenig@gmx.net

  - name: Monty Wiseman
    org:
    country: USA
    email: montywiseman32@gmail.com

normative:

informative:


--- abstract

As described in RFC5280, key usages are specified in X.509 certificates using the
certificate extensions "Key Usage" and "Extended Key Usage". This document defines
an Extended Key Usage (EKU) relating to keys that are dedicated to the purpose of
signing attestation evidence as introduced in RFC9334.



--- middle

# Introduction

Attesters, as defined in Remote Attestation Procedures
(RATS) in {{!RFC9334}}, can use cryptographic private keys to identify the origin of
the evidence and protect its integrity. Those private keys are referred to as
Attestation Keys.

Attestation Keys can be endorsed by a Certification Authority (CA) by issuing
X.509 certificates (see {{!RFC5280}}). Those certificates SHOULD include an extended
key usage to indicate that the associated key is dedicated to the purpose of attesting
evidence. This allows recipients of signed evidence to trust that the associated key is
controlled according to the constraints specified in this document.

# Terminology

Much of the terms used in this specification are borrowed from RATS ({{!RFC9334}}).
Readers of this specification should review the RATS architecture and its terminology
to put in context the text presented in this specification.

Attestation Key : A key under the control of the Attester and reserved for the purpose
of signing evidence.

# Extended Key Usage for Attestation Key

This specification defines the KeyPurposeId id-kp-attestationKey. This KeyPurposeId
is reserved for Attestation Keys.

The term "signing evidence" refers to performing a digital signature
using an Attestation Key over content that includes claims and measurements about the target
environment (see {{!RFC9334}}).

An Attestation Key must be associated with the "digital signing" key usage, as any
other keys used to performed digital signature. No other key usage should be assigned to
an Attestation Key.

Furthermore, an Attestation Key MUST adhere to the following constraints:

* An Attestation Key SHOULD be used by an Attester only to digitally sign evidence that
the Attester can observe in the target environment. The Attester SHOULD NOT use the
Attestation Key for any other purpose (dedication).

* An Attestation Key MUST NOT be controlled by any entity other than the associated
Attester. This constraint is to ensure that other entity can not impersonate the
Attester (non-repudiation).

## Including the EKU for Attestation Key in Certificates

When the EKU id-kp-attestationKey is included in a X.509, other considerations should
be taken:

* The X.509 extension "key usage" MUST be set to "digital signature". In other words,
the value of the associated field includes the bit "digitalSignature" set. Other key
usages MUST NOT be set.

* The X.509 extension "extended key usage" SHOULD NOT include usage other than the
one defined in this document (id-kp-attestationKey). If other extended key usages
are provided, they MUST be compatible with constraints outlined in this specification.

When the extended key usage id-kp-attestationKey is added to the X.509 EKU extension, it
is not necessary to mark this extension as critical. This is to foster interoperability
between systems that are not aware of this extended key usage. Systems that consume the
evidence signed by an attestation key, such as a Verifier, can enforce the presence of this
extended key usage through policy.

## Implication for a Certificate Authority

When a Certificate Authority issues a X.509 certificate that includes the extended key
usage defined in this specification, certain additional considerations MUST be taken to ensure
that the constraints defined in this document are respected.

Issuing a X.509 certificate with the extended key usage id-kp-attestationKey
equates to providing an endorsement of the attester as defined in the RATS architecture.
Therefore, the procedures and practices employed by a Certificate Authority MUST be
augmented to take into account the security considerations relating to the Attestation
Key as outlined in the RATS architecture.

In particular, it is not sufficient for a CA to verify that the subject of the certificate,
the Attester, has possession of the subject key. It MUST also ensure that the Attester is the only
entity that controls the key. This can be accomplished (but not restricted to) by using
a key confined to specialized hardware under the control of the Attester.

## Implication for the RATS Verifier

In {{!RFC9334}}, the Verifier is the role that consumes the evidence produced by an
Attester. As part of the verification process, the Verifier assesses endorsements, among
other things. A X.509 certificate containing the EKU id-kp-attestationKey is an
endorsement of the Attester by the issuing authorities.

## Implication for Cryptographic Modules

Attestation Keys are instantiated and operated on by cryptographic modules. These modules
MUST provide the services required to restrict the use of an Attestation Key to its
associated Attester.

The mechanisms used to perform those restrictions are out of scope for this specification.


# Conventions and Definitions

{::boilerplate bcp14-tagged}


# Security Considerations

For attestation evidence to be valuable, coordination between the various roles is required:

* The cryptographic module MUST restrict the use of the Attestation Key to the associated Attester.

* The CA MUST ensure that the Attester is the only entity that controls the Attestation Key which
is subject to the issuance of a certificate.

* A Verifier must perform the assessment of the presented evidence using all the procedures
required to ascertain as to the origin and validity of the attester.

The risks associated with a failure of this coordination reduces the quality of the trustworthiness
of the evidence.

The implications are outlines in the Security Considerations section in RATS ({{!RFC9334}}).


# IANA Considerations

For the ASN.1 module found in Appendix A, IANA is requested to assign
an object identifier for the module identifier (TBD0) with a
description of "id-mod-attestation-eku-2025". This should be allocated in the
"SMI Security for PKIX Module Identifier" registry (1.3.6.1.5.5.7.0).

For the ASN.1 module found in Appendix A, IANA is requested to assign
an object identifier for the extended key usage value (XX) with a
description of "id-kp-attestationKey". This should be allocated in the
"SMI Security for PKIX Extended Key Purpose" registry (1.3.6.1.5.5.7.3).


--- back

# Appendix A. ASN.1 Module
{:numbered="false"}

The following module adheres to ASN.1 specifications [X.680] and [X.690].
It defines the OID used for Attestation Key Extended Key Usage.

~~~
  AttestationEKU-2025 { iso(1) identified-organization(3) dod(6) internet(1)
       security(5) mechanisms(5) pkix(7) id-mod(0)
       id-mod-attestation-eku-2025(TBD0) }

  DEFINITIONS EXPLICIT TAGS ::=

  BEGIN

  -- EXPORTS ALL --

  -- IMPORTS NOTHING --

  -- OID Arc --

  id-kp  OBJECT IDENTIFIER  ::= {
    iso(1) identified-organization(3) dod(6) internet(1)
    security(5) mechanisms(5) pkix(7) kp(3) }

  -- Attestation Key Extended Key Usage --

  id-kp-attestationKey OBJECT IDENTIFIER ::= { id-kp XX }

  END
~~~

# Acknowledgments
{:numbered="false"}

TODO acknowledge.
